# Memory Benchmark

The `MemoryBenchmark.ino` was compiled with each `FEATURE_*` and the flash
memory and static RAM sizes were recorded. The `FEATURE_BASELINE` selection is
the baseline, and its memory usage  numbers are subtracted from the subsequent
`FEATURE_*` memory usage.

**Version**: AceTime v2.3-dev

**DO NOT EDIT**: This file was auto-generated using `make README.md`.

## How to Regenerate

To regenerate this README.md:

```
$ make clean_benchmarks
$ make benchmarks
$ make README.md
```

The `make benchmarks` target uses `collect.sh` script which calls `auniter.sh`
(https://github.com/bxparks/AUniter) to invoke the Arduino IDE programmatically.
It produces a `*.txt` file with the flash and ram usage information (e.g.
`nano.txt`). It now takes about 16 minutes to generate the `*.txt` files on my
quad-core Intel Core i7-3840QM CPU @ 2.80GHz laptop.

The `make README.md` command calls the `generated_readme.py` Python script which
generates this `README.md` file. The ASCII tables below are generated by the
`generate_table.awk` script, which takes each `*.txt` file and converts it to an
ASCII table.

## Library Size Changes

**v1.3:**
* The `BasicZoneManager` and `ExtendedZoneManager` classes were unified under a
  new parent interface `ZoneManager`. This seems to have caused the flash size
  to increase by around 1200 bytes on the AVR processors (Nano, Pro Micro),
  about 500 bytes on a SAMD, about 800 bytes on a ESP8266, 100 bytes on a ESP32,
  and 1400 bytes on a Teensy 3.2. The 8-bit processors suffer the most flash
  size increase proportional to their limited 32kB limit.
* Adding the `ZoneManager` interface simplifies a lot of the complexity with
  saving and restoring time zones using the `TimeZoneData` object, and I think
  it is worth the extra cost of flash size. The mitigating factor is that
  applications targetted towards 8-bit processors will normally have fixed
  number of timezones at compile time, so they can avoid using a `ZoneManager`,
  and avoid this penalty in flash size.

**v1.4.1+:**
* Removed the `ZoneInfo::transitionBufSize` field from the `ZoneInfo` struct,
  which saves 1 byte on 8-bit processors (none on 32-bit processors due to
  4-byte alignment). We save 266 bytes for `BasicZoneManager` and 386 bytes for
  `ExtendedZoneManager` when all the zones are loaded into the zone registry.
* Incorporated zoneName compression causes flash/ram usage to increase by
  ~250/120 bytes when using only 1-2 zones, but *decreases* flash consumption by
  1200-2400 bytes when all the zones are loaded into the `ZoneManager`.

**v1.5+:**
* Changing `ZoneProcessorCache::getType()` from a `virtual` to a non-virtual
  method saves 250-350 bytes of flash memory when using a `BasicZoneManager` or
  an `ExtendedZoneManager` on an 8-bit AVR processor. Unexpectedly, the flash
  memory consumption *increases* slightly (~0-50 bytes) for some ARM processors
  and the ESP32. Since those processors have far more flash memory, this seems
  like a good tradeoff.
* Changing `BasicZoneProcessor` and `ExtendedZoneProcessor` to be subclasses of
  the templatized `BasicZoneProcessorTemplate` and
  `ExtendedZoneProcessorTemplate` classes causes reduction of flash consumption
  by 250-400 bytes for 32-bit processors. Don't know why. (Very little
  difference for 8-bit AVR).
* Adding a `ZoneInfoStore` layer of indirection (to support more complex
  ZoneProcessors and Brokers) causes flash memory to go up by 100-200 bytes.

**v1.6:**
* Added support for `LinkRegistry` to `BasicZoneManager` and
  `ExtendedZoneManager`. This increases the flash memory usage by 150-500 bytes
  when using one of these classes due to the code required by `LinkRegistrar`. This extra cost is incurred even if the `LinkRegistry` is set to 0 elements. Each `LinkEntry` consumes 8 bytes (2 x `uint32_t`). So a
  `zonedb::kLinkRegistry` with 183 elements uses 1464 extra bytes of flash; a
  `zonedbx::kLinkRegistry` with 207 elements uses 1656 extra bytes.

**v1.7:**
* The virtual destructor on the `Clock` base class removed. This reduced the
  flash usage by 618 bytes on AVR processors , 328 bytes on the SAMD21, but only
  50-60 bytes on other 32-bit processors.
* The various `printShortNameTo()` or `printShortTo()` methods changed to
  replace the underscore in the zone names (e.g. `Los_Angeles`) with spaces
  (e.g. `Los Angeles`) to be more human friendly. This made little difference in
  the flash memory consumption, except on the ESP32 where it increased by
  200-300 bytes.

**v1.7.2**
* The `SystemClock::clockMillis()` is now non-virtual, using compile-time
  polymorphism through C++ template, and incorporating the same techniques from
  AceRoutine v1.3. Saves about 20-40 bytes of flash.

**v1.7.5:**
* `ExtendedZoneProcessor.compareTransitionToMatch()` was modified to
  detect an exact equality between a `Transition` and its `MatchingEra` if any
  of the 3 time stamp versions ('w', 's', 'u') are equal. Adds about 120-150
  bytes of flash on 8-bit and 32-bit processors. But removing
  `originalTransitionTime` from `Transition` decreases flash usage by about 20
  bytes.
* Upgrade ESP8266 Boards from 2.7.4 to 3.0.2. Flash consumption increases by
  3-5 kB across the board.
* Upgrade Teensyduino from 1.54 to 1.55. Add memory consumed by `malloc()` and
  `free()` when using classes with virtual methods into baseline
  MemoryBenchmark, reducing the actual memory usage of various features by
  ~3kB.

**v1.8.0:**
* Move Clock and SystemClock benchmarks into AceTimeClock v1.0.0.
* Extract thin links from BasicZoneManager and ExtendedZoneManager into
  new BasicLinkManager and ExtendedLinkManager classes.
    * Saves 200-500 bytes of flash for BasicZoneManager and ExtendedZoneManager.
    * Applications can decide whether to use thin links through the LinkManager
      (~2000 flash bytes for AVR) or use fat links through the
      `kZoneAndLinkRegistry` (~5000 flash bytes for AVR).
* Create various test objects as global variables instead of stack variables
  to get a more accurate measurement of their static memory consumption.

**v1.9.0:**
* Reduce flash usage of `BasicZoneManager` and `ExtendedZoneManager` by
  1100-1300 bytes on AVR processors:
    * Extract `BasicZoneProcessorCache` and `ExtendedZoneProcessorCache` out
      of `BasicZoneManager` and `ExtendedZoneManager`, making them
      non-templatized.
    * Remove all `virtual` methods from `ZoneManager`, making the ZoneManager
      hierarchy non-polymorphic.
    * Looks like I am reverting some of the changes made in v1.3 when I created
      the `ZoneManager` interface.
* Reduce flash usage of `BasicLinkManager` and `ExtendedLinkManager` by
  68 bytes on AVR processors by removing pure `virtual` methods on `LinkManager`
  base class.
* Increase flash usage by 34 bytes on AVR processors due to slight refactoring
  of `getHighWater()` with `getAllocSize()`. Only 4-8 bytes increase on 32-bit
  processors.

**v1.10.0:**
* Remove support for SAMD21 boards.
    * Arduino IDE 1.8.19 with SparkFun SAMD 1.8.6 can no longer upload binaries
      to these boards. Something about bossac 1.7.0 not found.
* Add memory consumption benchmarks for `ZoneSorterByName` and
  `ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName` for `BasicZoneManager` and `ExtendedZoneManager`.
    * AVR: 180-530 bytes of flash
    * 32-bit: 120-600 bytes of flash
* Upgrade tool chain:
    * Arduino IDE from 1.8.13 to 1.8.19
    * Arduino AVR from 1.8.3 to 1.8.4
    * STM32duino from 2.0.0 to 2.2.0
    * ESP32 from 1.0.6 to 2.0.2
    * Teensyduino from 1.55 to 1.56
* Add support for `fold` parameter in `LocalDateTime`, `OffsetDateTime`,
  `ZonedDateTime`, and `ExtendedZoneProcessor`. Increases flash usage:
    * AVR:
        * ~600 bytes, in `ExtendedZoneProcessor` for additional search logic,
        * ~150 bytes, `BasicZoneProcessor`, to carry along the `fold` parameter
    * most 32-bit: 400-600 bytes
    * Teensy: 1300 bytes (no idea why)

**v1.11.0**
* Upgrade ZoneInfo database so that Links are symbolic links to Zones, instead
  of hard links to Zones.
    * Allows Links to know whether they are links.
    * Allows extraction of the zoneId and zoneNames of the target Zone.
    * AVR: Increases flash consumption by ~270 bytes.
    * STM32: Increases flash by 120-150 bytes.
    * ESP8266: Increases flash by 250-300 bytes.
    * ESP32: Increases flash by ~190 bytes.
    * Teensy 3.2: Increase flash by 450-1300 bytes.

**v1.11.1**
* Change `ZoneInfoBroker::targetZoneInfo()` method to return a `ZoneInfoBroker`
  instead of raw `ZoneInfo*` pointer.
    * Increases flash usage by 4-16 bytes for the most part.

**v1.11.5**
* Upgrade tool chain
    * Arduino CLI from 0.20.2 to 0.27.1
    * Arduino AVR Boards from 1.8.4 to 1.8.5
    * STM32duino from 2.2.0 to 2.3.0
    * ESP32 Boards from 2.0.2 to 2.0.5
    * Teensyduino from 1.56 to 1.57
* Upgrade TZDB from 2022b to 2022d

**v2.0**
* Use `int16_t` year fields.
* Implement adjustable epoch year.
* Upgrade to TZDB 2022f.
* AVR:
    * BasicZoneManager increases ~200 bytes
    * ExtendedZoneManager increases ~500 bytes
    * `zonedb` increases ~1.5 kiB
    * `zonedbx` increases ~3 kiB
* ESP8266
    * BasicZoneManager increases ~50 bytes
    * ExtendedZoneManager increases ~150 bytes
    * `zonedb` increases ~300 bytes
    * `zonedbx` increases ~1.5 kiB

**v2.0.1**
* Upgrade to TZDB 2022g.
* Incorporate `ZonedExtra` to replace various `TimeZone` methods.

**v2.1.0**
* Remove `LinkManager` and `LinkRegistry`.
* Unify links, adding an additional `targetInfo` field in `ZoneInfo`.
    * Increases flash by ~1kB on 8-bit and ~2kB on 32-bit for ~600 zones.

**v2.1.1+**
* Simplify ZoneRule.letter handling to use ZoneRule.letterIndex for all letters,
  not just ones over 1 character long. On 8-bit AVR:
    * BasicZoneProcessor
        * Increases flash consumption for 1-2 zones by ~200 bytes.
        * No change for the full TZ database.
    * ExtendedZoneProcessor
        * No change for 1-2 zones.
        * Decreases flash consumption by ~300 bytes for full TZ database.

**v2.2.0**
* Upgrade tool chain
    * Arduino AVR from 1.8.5 to 1.8.6
    * STM32duino from 2.3.0 to 2.4.0
    * ESP8266 from 3.0.2 to 3.1.2 failed, reverted back to 3.0.2
    * ESP32 from 2.0.5 to 2.0.7
* Add support for Seeed XIAO SAMD21
    * Using Seeeduino SAMD Boards 1.8.3
* Upgrade to TZDB 2023b

**v2.2.2**
* Upgrade to TZDB 2023c

**v2.2.3**
* Add support for Adafruit ItsyBitsy M4
    * Using Adafruit SAMD Boards 1.7.11
* Remove Teensy 3.2
    * Nearing end of life. Moved to Tier 2 (should work).
* Upgrade tool chain
    * Seeeduino SAMD Boards 1.8.4
    * STM32duino Boards 2.5.0
    * ESP32 Boards 2.0.9

**v2.3-dev**
* Implement 1-second resolution in ExtendedZoneProcessor.
    * Increases flash usage by ~1kB on 8-bit processors, but only 0-100 bytes
      on 32-bit processors.
* Implement CompleteZoneProcessor as a specialization of ExtendedZoneProcessor.
    * Enables the creation of `zonedbc` database which contains all TZDB
      timezones, for all years going back to 1844, the earliest transition in
      the TZDB.
    * The flash consumption of zonedbc is roughly 2X of zonedbx.
* Revert `zonedb` to use 8-bit year fields.
    * Increases memory consumption for BasicZoneManager w/ 1 zone by around
      150 bytes.
    * Decreases memory cosumption for BasicZoneManager w/ all timezones by
      800-900 bytes.
* Move ZoneContext and its string arrays into PROGMEM.
    * Reduces RAM usage by 150-200 bytes on AVR and ESP8266 processors.
* Merge `createAbbreviation()`
    * `BasicZoneProcessor`: Slight (30-60 bytes) increase in flash memory,
      no change in RAM usage.
    * `ExtendedZoneProcessor`: Slight (30-60 bytes) increase in flash memory.
      But saves ~16 bytes of RAM for 8-bit, ~64 bytes of RAM for 32-bit.
* Support multi-character `ZoneRule.letter` field
    * Enables `Africa/Windhoek` and `America/Belize` in the `zonedb` database
      used with `BasicZoneProcessor`.
    * Increases flash memory for `zonedb` by ~150 bytes on 8-bit, ~200 on 32-bit
      processors.

# Legend

* [1] Delta flash and ram consumption for `Basic ZoneSorterByName` and
  `Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName` are calculated by subtracting the
  `BasicZoneManager (1 zone)` numbers, to isolate the memory consumption
  of just the sorter classes.
* [2] Delta flash and ram consumption for `Extended ZoneSorterByName` and
  `Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName` are calculated by subtracting the
  `ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)` numbers, to isolate the memory
  consumption of just the sorter classes.
* [3] Delta flash and ram consumption for `Complete ZoneSorterByName` and
  `Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName` are calculated by subtracting the
  `CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)` numbers, to isolate the memory
  consumption of just the sorter classes.
* An entry of `-1` indicates that the memory usage exceeded the maximum of the
  microcontroller and the compiler did not generate the desired information.

## Arduino Nano

* 16MHz ATmega328P
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* Arduino AVR Boards 1.8.6

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               |    474/   11 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          |   1108/   21 |   634/   10 |
| ZonedDateTime                          |   1444/   30 |   970/   19 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     |   1406/   13 |   932/    2 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                |   7624/  208 |  7150/  197 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               |   8170/  357 |  7696/  346 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              |   7834/  219 |  7360/  208 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           |  19686/  599 | 19212/  588 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     |  25066/  599 | 24592/  588 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             |   8608/  221 |   774/    2 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    |   8740/  221 |   906/    2 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             |  11114/  623 | 10640/  612 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            |  11720/ 1187 | 11246/ 1176 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           |  11294/  629 | 10820/  618 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        |  36398/ 1111 | 35924/ 1100 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  |  42430/ 1111 | 41956/ 1100 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          |  12064/  631 |   770/    2 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] |  12148/  631 |   854/    2 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          |     -1/   -1 |     0/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] |     -1/   -1 |     0/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

## Sparkfun Pro Micro

* 16 MHz ATmega32U4
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* SparkFun AVR Boards 1.1.13

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               |   3470/  153 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          |   4080/  161 |   610/    8 |
| ZonedDateTime                          |   4416/  170 |   946/   17 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     |   4400/  153 |   930/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                |  10596/  348 |  7126/  195 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               |  11124/  495 |  7654/  342 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              |  10806/  359 |  7336/  206 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           |  22656/  737 | 19186/  584 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     |  28036/  737 | 24566/  584 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             |  11580/  361 |   774/    2 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    |  11712/  361 |   906/    2 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             |  14070/  763 | 10600/  610 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            |  14674/ 1325 | 11204/ 1172 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           |  14250/  769 | 10780/  616 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        |  39368/ 1249 | 35898/ 1096 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  |  45400/ 1249 | 41930/ 1096 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          |  15020/  771 |   770/    2 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] |  15104/  771 |   854/    2 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  |     -1/   -1 |    -1/   -1 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          |     -1/   -1 |     0/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] |     -1/   -1 |     0/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

## Seeed Studio XIAO SAMD21

* SAMD21, 48 MHz ARM Cortex-M0+
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.1
* Seeeduino SAMD Boards 1.8.4

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               |  34068/    0 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          |  34372/    0 |   304/    0 |
| ZonedDateTime                          |  35116/    0 |  1048/    0 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     |  35100/    0 |  1032/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                |  38916/    0 |  4848/    0 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               |  39276/    0 |  5208/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              |  39020/    0 |  4952/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           |  54948/    0 | 20880/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     |  63196/    0 | 29128/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             |  39516/    0 |   496/    0 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    |  39572/    0 |   552/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             |  40844/    0 |  6776/    0 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            |  41220/    0 |  7152/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           |  40948/    0 |  6880/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        |  73796/    0 | 39728/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  |  83028/    0 | 48960/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          |  41436/    0 |   488/    0 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] |  41500/    0 |   552/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             |  41548/    0 |  7480/    0 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            |  42780/    0 |  8712/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           |  41652/    0 |  7584/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        | 121348/    0 | 87280/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 130580/    0 | 96512/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          |  42140/    0 |   488/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] |  42196/    0 |   544/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

## STM32 Blue Pill

* STM32F103C8, 72 MHz ARM Cortex-M3
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* STM32duino 2.5.0

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               |  21492/ 3840 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          |  21848/ 3856 |   356/   16 |
| ZonedDateTime                          |  21928/ 3872 |   436/   32 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     |  22504/ 3848 |  1012/    8 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                |  26308/ 4056 |  4816/  216 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               |  26680/ 4264 |  5188/  424 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              |  26428/ 4076 |  4936/  236 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           |  42732/ 4076 | 21240/  236 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     |  51264/ 4076 | 29772/  236 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             |  26896/ 4080 |   468/    4 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    |  26972/ 4080 |   544/    4 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             |  28016/ 4580 |  6524/  740 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            |  28396/ 5312 |  6904/ 1472 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           |  28132/ 4588 |  6640/  748 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        |  61420/ 4588 | 39928/  748 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  |  70992/ 4588 | 49500/  748 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          |  28596/ 4592 |   464/    4 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] |  28672/ 4592 |   540/    4 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             |  28712/ 4580 |  7220/  740 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            |  29948/ 5312 |  8456/ 1472 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           |  28828/ 4588 |  7336/  748 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        | 108964/ 4588 | 87472/  748 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 118536/ 4588 | 97044/  748 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          |  29292/ 4592 |   464/    4 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] |  29364/ 4592 |   536/    4 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

## SAMD51 (Adafruit ItsyBitsy M4)

* SAMD51, 120 MHz ARM Cortex-M4
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* Adafruit SAMD 1.7.11

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               |  10580/    0 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          |  10872/    0 |   292/    0 |
| ZonedDateTime                          |  11544/    0 |   964/    0 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     |  11536/    0 |   956/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                |  15392/    0 |  4812/    0 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               |  15760/    0 |  5180/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              |  15512/    0 |  4932/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           |  31444/    0 | 20864/    0 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     |  39692/    0 | 29112/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             |  16000/    0 |   488/    0 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    |  16052/    0 |   540/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             |  17108/    0 |  6528/    0 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            |  17496/    0 |  6916/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           |  17224/    0 |  6644/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        |  50076/    0 | 39496/    0 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  |  59304/    0 | 48724/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          |  17712/    0 |   488/    0 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] |  17764/    0 |   540/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             |  17792/    0 |  7212/    0 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            |  19028/    0 |  8448/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           |  17908/    0 |  7328/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        |  97608/    0 | 87028/    0 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 106840/    0 | 96260/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          |  18396/    0 |   488/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] |  18444/    0 |   536/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```
## ESP8266

* NodeMCU 1.0, 80MHz ESP8266
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* ESP8266 Boards 3.0.2

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               | 260089/27892 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          | 260613/27912 |   524/   20 |
| ZonedDateTime                          | 261573/27928 |  1484/   36 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     | 261553/27900 |  1464/    8 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                | 267117/28528 |  7028/  636 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               | 267533/28736 |  7444/  844 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              | 267277/28552 |  7188/  660 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           | 283613/28552 | 23524/  660 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     | 292141/28552 | 32052/  660 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             | 268029/28552 |   752/    0 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    | 268157/28552 |   880/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             | 269429/29152 |  9340/ 1260 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            | 269861/29880 |  9772/ 1988 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           | 269573/29160 |  9484/ 1268 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        | 302901/29160 | 42812/ 1268 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 312469/29160 | 52380/ 1268 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          | 270325/29160 |   752/    0 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] | 270373/29160 |   800/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             | 270145/29508 | 10056/ 1616 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            | 271425/30236 | 11336/ 2344 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           | 270289/29516 | 10200/ 1624 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        | 350449/29516 | 90360/ 1624 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 360017/29516 | 99928/ 1624 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          | 271041/29516 |   752/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] | 271089/29516 |   800/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

## ESP32

* ESP32-01 Dev Board, 240 MHz Tensilica LX6
* Arduino IDE 1.8.19, Arduino CLI 0.31.0
* ESP32 Boards 2.0.9

```
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Functionality                          |  flash/  ram |       delta |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| baseline                               | 228345/21976 |     0/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| LocalDateTime                          | 230757/21984 |  2412/    8 |
| ZonedDateTime                          | 231737/22000 |  3392/   24 |
| Manual ZoneManager                     | 231749/21976 |  3404/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic TimeZone (1 zone)                | 235929/22184 |  7584/  208 |
| Basic TimeZone (2 zones)               | 236365/22392 |  8020/  416 |
| BasicZoneManager (1 zone)              | 236097/22208 |  7752/  232 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones)           | 252401/22208 | 24056/  232 |
| BasicZoneManager (all zones+links)     | 260929/22208 | 32584/  232 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Basic ZoneSorterByName [1]             | 236649/22208 |   552/    0 |
| Basic ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [1]    | 236729/22208 |   632/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended TimeZone (1 zone)             | 237993/22712 |  9648/  736 |
| Extended TimeZone (2 zones)            | 238417/23440 | 10072/ 1464 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (1 zone)           | 238129/22720 |  9784/  744 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones)        | 271425/22720 | 43080/  744 |
| ExtendedZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 280993/22720 | 52648/  744 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Extended ZoneSorterByName [2]          | 238681/22720 |   552/    0 |
| Extended ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [2] | 238761/22720 |   632/    0 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete TimeZone (1 zone)             | 238669/22712 | 10324/  736 |
| Complete TimeZone (2 zones)            | 239941/23440 | 11596/ 1464 |
| CompleteZoneManager (1 zone)           | 238805/22720 | 10460/  744 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones)        | 318933/22720 | 90588/  744 |
| CompleteZoneManager (all zones+links)  | 328501/22720 | 100156/  744 |
|----------------------------------------+--------------+-------------|
| Complete ZoneSorterByName [3]          | 239357/22720 |   552/    0 |
| Complete ZoneSorterByOffsetAndName [3] | 239429/22720 |   624/    0 |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+

```

RAM usage remains constant as more objects are created, which indicates that an
initial pool of a certain minimum size is created regardless of the actual RAM
usage by objects.

